New 'How to archive' guide (#55)
temporalio/documentation: docs/archive-data.md

---
id: archive-data
title: How to archive data
sidebar_label: Archive data
---

Data that is generated from a Workflow, such as Event Histories,  persists in normal Temporal storage per the configured retention period. The retention period exists so that the persistence store is not overwhelmed by the accummulation of Workflow data over time. To preserve Workflow data indefinitely, you can use the Archival feature which automatically moves the data from the normal persistence storage to long-term storage after the Workflow retention period expires.

:::info

**Archival is currently disabled by default.**

> - Archival is disabled when running Temporal via `docker-compose` and can not be enabled.

Reviewer: I think you could just say "Archival is not supported when running via `docker-compose`

- Archival is disabled by default when cloning the repo and installing the system manually, but can be enabled in the config.

> - Archival is disabled by default when deploying via [helm charts](https://github.com/temporalio/helm-charts/blob/d08ab3a582e9bc605da460b79cd7524e18d2c91d/templates/server-configmap.yaml#L176) but can be enabled in the config.

Reviewer: Btw if you do a link like this it will lock the link to the specific commit hash when you created the link. Compare to this

https://github.com/temporalio/helm-charts/blob/master/templates/server-configmap.yaml#L176

which dynamically links to master.

Reviewer: Just something to have in mind

:::

:::info

> **Archival currently only supports Event Histories.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Archival only supports Event Histories.**
```

> You may notice some boilerplate infrastructure to support archiving visibility records. This functionality is not yet supported and visibility records are currently deleted after the Workflow retention period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may notice some boilerplate infrastructure to support archiving visibility records. Visibility archival is not yet supported and visibility records are deleted after the Workflow retention period.
```

:::

> ## Archiving use cases

Reviewer: "ing"?

Maybe just. "Use cases"

> There are two main reasons you may want to keep data after the retention period has past:

Reviewer: I wouldn't say "main" because there could be a better reason we don't know of and somebody would assume its not a good fit because it's not listed as "main"

Reviewer: Also the word "past" means back in time. You are looking for "passed"

Reviewer: Remind me to tell you a funny story about this

1. **Compliance**: For legal reasons, data may need to be stored for a long period of time.
2. **Debugging**: Older data may help with debugging.

## Archival components

> Archival consists of four main components.

Reviewer: Are these really "components"

Author: trying "elements"

> 1. **Archival feature configuration**: Archival is controlled by the [`archival` configuration](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml#L81) in the `config/development.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Archival configuration**: Archival is controlled by the [`archival` configuration](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml#L81) in the `config/development.yaml` file.
```

Reviewer: Also here you use the alternative version of github linking (master instead of specific commit) can we please make this consistent one way or the other

Author: > Also here you use the alternative version of github linking (master instead of specific commit) can we please make this consistent one way or the other

Linking to a commit was an oversight/mistake - we want to link to master.

> 2. **Archive Provider**: Location where the data is archived to. Commonly used providers are S3, GCloud, Kafka, and the local file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Archive Provider**: Location where the data should be archived. Supported providers are S3, GCloud, Kafka, and the local file system.
```

Author: Supported suggests that we don't or won't support others - we support anything as long as the provider is built to support it. I prefer "commonly used" in this context.

> 3. **Archiver**: System component which archives and retrieves data. An Archiver is directly correlated to a single Archive Provider. 

Reviewer: This sentence is very on top of itself. 

"An Archiver is directly correlated to a single Archive Provider." 

This is a very complex wording

Author: Ya, can simplify that concept.

> 4. **URI**: Specifies to the Namespace which Archiver Provider and Archiver should be used. The schema of the URI identifies which Archiver and Provider to use. Where the URI points to identifies the archive location.

Reviewer: This is very verbose and hard to grasp IMO. Can we avoid using so many terms we just introduced to explain another term we're introducing.

Author: rewrote

## Archival setup    

To setup Archival, there are a few things you will need to do:

> 1. Setup archive providers. 

Reviewer: Two things:

Before you called it "archiver provider" and you capitalized "Archiver" and "Provider".

Reviewer: Also why plural? Most people will probably have one provider.

> 2. Manage Archival related configurations for the Temporal server.

Reviewer: This is not a helpful sentence. "Configure archival"

> 3. Create a Namespace that enables Archival and is registered with an Archival URI.

Reviewer: I think this could also be simplified or made more accurate even.

"Create a namespace with archival enabled and provide it a valid Archival URI."

or something

> ### Archival providers

Reviewer: Same as before:

Before you called it "archiver provider" and you capitalized "Archiver" and "Provider".

> Temporal supports several archive providers (and archivers) out of the box as well as the option to create and use your own.

Reviewer: Before you called it "archiver provider" and you capitalized "Archiver" and "Provider".

Also the distinction: "archive providers (and archivers)" is not clear

> To archive data with a specific provider, Temporal must have a corresponding archiver component installed. [Currently supported archive providers](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver) include the local filesystem (of whatever host Temporal is currently running on), Google Cloud, and S3.

Reviewer: You mention Kafka above but then not here. Also I would just list the supported archivers out of the box in a bullet list on this page (with each item linking to the code)

> The local filesystem is used mainly for local installations, testing, and when running Temporal via `docker-compose`. In a production environment, you will most likely want to archive data using one of the cloud based storage systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The local filesystem is useful for testing, and when running Temporal via `docker-compose`. In a production environment, you will most likely want to archive data using one of the cloud based storage systems.
```

I think this section should be reworded. On one hand this info contradicts the blue box at the top of the page because I thought you couldn't archive with 'docker-compose'? Also we should be more explicit and tell people to never rely on local filesystem archival for production.

> Get started with Google Cloud storage here: https://cloud.google.com/storage

Reviewer: Sort of weird to link this way considering you hyperlink everywhere else. Also not sure these links are all that useful (could be wrong).

Reviewer: Also the formatting of these two sentences is weird and they aren't on separate lines.

Get started with S3 storage here: https://aws.amazon.com/s3

> You will need the URI of the storage location where you want the data to be archived.

Reviewer: This should either be remove or greatly elaborated on. This tells the user they need to do something but does not educate them on how to do it.

If you want to create your own archiver, review the [Custom archiver](#custom-archiver) section below. Contributions are welcome.

### Archival configuration

> First familiarize yourself with the configuration in [`config/development.yaml`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/config/development.yaml#L81).

Reviewer: Don't like starting out by telling the user to go and look at a YML file. To be clear I don't have a problem with you linking and mentioning it here, just not " First familiarize yourself ".

More importantly, please don't use template formatting "``" and a link together. There is zero way to tell its a link.

> | Config |  Description |

Reviewer: Here is what I recommend. Split table into 3 columns not two. Same columns you have but one in the middle is called "acceptable values".

|--------|--------------|

> | `archival.history.state`                       | Acceptable values are `"enabled"`,`"disabled"`. This must be set to `"enabled"` to use the Archival feature with any Namespace in the cluster. |

Reviewer: Why are properties quoted and styled with template formatting?

| `archival.history.enableRead`                  | Acceptable values are `true`, `false`. This must be set to `true` to read from the archived Event History. |

> | `archival.history.provider`                    | Sub `provider` configs are `filestore`, `gstorage`, `s3`, or `your_custom_provider`. The default config specifies `filestore`. |

Reviewer: Why is `provider` styled? I think we need to be much more conservative with visual formatting

Reviewer: To be honest I struggle with this too but it's really for the best

> | `archival.history.provider.filestore.fileMode` | This specifies the file permissions of the archived files. We recommend using the default value of `"0666"` to avoid read/write issues. |

Reviewer: The "archival.history" prefix is common to all config and takes up a lot of horizontal page space. Maybe we can omit it or state it once at the beginning?

| `archival.history.provider.filestore.dirMode`  |  This specifies the directory permissions of the archive directory. we recommend using the default value of `"0766"` to avoid read/write issues. |
| `namespaceDefaults.archival.history.state`     | Acceptable values are `"enabled"`, `"disabled"`. This sets the default state of the Archival feature whenever a new Namespace is created without specifying the Archival state. |
| `namespaceDefaults.archival.history.URI`       | The value must be a URI of the file store location and match a schema that correlates to a provider. |

> Consider the following example:

Reviewer: This might have been more useful before the table.

```yaml
# Cluster level Archival config
archival:
  # Event History configuration
  history:
    # State at the cluster level
    state: "enabled"
    # Read permissions
    enableRead: true

>     # Available providers

Reviewer: The tense/phrasing for some of the comments is weird. The way you phrased this one for example makes it seem like "filestore" and "gstorage" would be the only supported providers.

    provider:
      # Local filestore provider  
      filestore:
        # File permissions
        fileMode: "0666"
        # Directory permissions
        dirMode: "0766"
      # Google Cloud provider  
      gstorage:
        # Google Cloud credentials file
        credentialsPath: "/tmp/gcloud/keyfile.json"

# Default values for a Namespace if none are provided at creation
namespaceDefaults:
  # Archival defaults
  archival:
    # Event History defaults
    history:
      # Default state
      state: "enabled"
      # Default URI
      URI: "file:///tmp/temporal_archival/development"
```

> In the configuration above we see that:

Reviewer: I'm not sure this section provides value but it definitely doesn't with how it's located on the page currently.

1. Archival is enabled at the cluster level.
2. Namespaces can use either the local filestore provider or the Google Cloud provider.
3. New Namespaces will default to the local provider, 

> :::tip

Reviewer: This green is so jarring. I especially don't like that there is a code sample inside of it

> **Want to disable Archival?**

Reviewer: Out of curiosity why are we using question form here?

You can disable Archival by setting `archival.history.state` and `namespaceDefaults.archival.history.state` to `"disabled"`.

Example:

```yaml
archival:
  history:
    state: "disabled"

namespaceDefaults:
  archival:
    history:
      state: "disabled"
```

:::

### Namespace creation

> The Archival URI is set when a Namespace is created. If you do not specify the URI when creating a Namespace, it will use the value of `defaultNamespace.archival.history.URI` from the `config/development.yaml` file. Once set, the URI can not be changed. Each Namespace supports a single Archival URI, but each Namespace can use a different URI (archiver).

Reviewer: "The Archival URI is set when a Namespace is created. "

Don't like the tense. Also the next sentence sort of contradicts it: "If you do not specify the URI when creating a Namespace..."

In general I think this entire paragraph could be way clearer and less wordy.

> At the cluster level, `archival.history.state` must be set to `"enabled"` for Archival to work at the Namespace level for Even Histories. Once enabled at the cluster level, a Namespace can safely switch between `enabled` and `disabled` states.

Reviewer: "Even Histories"

Also reword,

"To enable Namespace archival, `archival.history.state` must be set to `"enabled"` at a cluster level. Only then a can Namespaces safely switch between `enabled` and `disabled` states.:

> Archival is supported in global Namespaces (Namespaces spanning multiple clusters). When Archival is running in a global Namepsace, it will first run on the active cluster and then some time later it will run on the standby cluster. Before archiving, a history check is done to see what has been previously uploaded.

Reviewer: "uploaded" is a weird term here (not incorrect just weird)

## Archive reads
 
To retrieve archived Event Histories you will need the Workflow Id and the Run Id:

```bash

> $ ./temporal --ns <namespace> wf show --wid <workflowId> --rid <runId>

Reviewer: unrelated, can code snippets have copy buttons? (and the copy shouldn't take the $).

```

> :::tip

Reviewer: #nomorestyledboxes

> Want to test this feature locally? Start by running a Temporal server:

Reviewer: This seems like it should be in a guide.

```bash
$ ./temporal-server start
```

Then register a new Namespace with Archival enabled. 

```bash
$ ./tctl --ns samples-namespace namespace register --gd false --history_archival_status enabled --retention 0
```

Next, run a sample workflow such as the [helloworld temporal sample](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal-go-samples/tree/master/helloworld).

> Once the sample execution has finished, you can view the archived Event Histories by copying the `workflowId` and `runId` of the completed Workflow from the log output and running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once execution has finished, you can view the archived Event Histories by copying the `workflowId` and `runId` of the completed Workflow from the log output and running:
```

```bash
$ ./temporal --ns samples-namespace wf show --wid <workflowId> --rid <runId>
```

:::

## Custom archiver

> Temporal does not intend to limit you to specific archive locations. To use a provider that is not currently supported you may create your own archiver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporal does not intend to limit you to specific archive locations. To use a provider that is not currently supported you may create your own archiver.
```

"archive locations"? What does that have to do with this section

### Create a new package

The first step is to create a new package for your implementation in [`/common/archiver`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver). Create a new directory in the archiver folder and arrange the  structure to look like the following:

> ```

Reviewer: The way this is styled and presented is sort of weird.

Why us "./common/archiver" using a relative path for example

./common/archiver
  - filestore/                      -- Filestore implementation
  - provider/
      - provider.go                 -- Provider of archiver instances
  - yourImplementation/
      - historyArchiver.go          -- HistoryArchiver implementation
      - historyArchiver_test.go     -- Unit tests for HistoryArchiver
      - visibilityArchiver.go       -- VisibilityArchiver implementations
      - visibilityArchiver_test.go  -- Unit tests for VisibilityArchiver
```

> ### Implement interfaces

Reviewer: Implement interfaces is an oxymoron. Interfaces are everything but implementation

Next, implement the [`HistoryArchiver`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/archiver/interface.go#L80) and the [`VisibilityArchiver`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/archiver/interface.go#L109) interfaces.

```go
type HistoryArchiver interface {

> 	// Archive is used to archive a workflow history. When the context expires the method should stop trying to archive.

Reviewer: Formatting is messed up here.

Reviewer: Also what file should these be in? You never say. I think putting the file name above each snippet is nice

    Archive(context.Context, URI, *ArchiveVisibilityRequest, ...ArchiveOption) error

    // Query is used to retrieve archived visibility records.
    // Check the Get() method of the HistoryArchiver interface in Step 2 for parameters' meaning and requirements.
    // The request includes a string field called query, which describes what kind of visibility records should be returned. For example, it can be some SQL-like syntax query string.
    // Your implementation is responsible for parsing and validating the query, and also returning all visibility records that match the query.
    // Currently the maximum context timeout passed into the method is 3 minutes, so it's ok if this method takes a long time to run.
    Query(context.Context, URI, *QueryVisibilityRequest) (*QueryVisibilityResponse, error)

    // ValidateURI is used to define what a valid URI for an implementation is.
    ValidateURI(URI) error
}
```

### Update provider

> Update provider to enable access to your implementation by modifying the [`/provider/provider.go`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/archiver/provider/provider.go) file so that the ArchiverProvider knows how to create an instance of your archiver. 

Reviewer: "Update provider" what does this mean? Is this misphrasing or am I missing something?

Also now you are using "ArchiverProvider" one word camelcase and not styled

### Add configs

> Add configs for you archiver to static yaml config files, such as `config/development.yaml`. 

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't provide much value and is sort of circular.

Then modify the [`HistoryArchiverProvider`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/service/config/config.go#L403) and [`VisibilityArchiverProvider`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/service/config/config.go#L421) struct in the `./common/service/config.go` accordingly.

### Custom archiver FAQ

> **If my Archive method can automatically be retried by the caller, how can I record and access progress between retries?**

Reviewer: at least from the guide itself I don't understand what this problem actually means

Author: Anyone going through the custom archiver steps will understand once they try to implement the methods

        }
    }
}
```

**How does my history archiver implementation read history?**

The archiver package provides a utility called [`HistoryIterator`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/archiver/historyIterator.go) which is a wrapper of [`HistoryManager`](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/persistence/historyStore.go). `HistoryIterator` is more simple than the `HistoryManager`, which is available in the BootstrapContainer, so archiver implementations can choose to use it when reading Workflow histories. See the [historyIterator.go](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/persistence/historyStore.go) file for more details. Use the [filestore historyArchiver implementation](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/tree/master/common/archiver/filestore) as an example.

**Should my archiver define its own error types?**

Each archiver is free to define and return its own errors. However many common errors which exist between archivers are already defined in [constants.go](https://github.com/temporalio/temporal/blob/master/common/archiver/constants.go).

> **Is there a generic query syntax for the visibility archiver?**

Reviewer: There is no visibility archiver?

Author: There is - but it is not fully operational. And any archiver implementation needs to support it currently :)
